Aeons_End_Expedition_Packet_Schema.md, before:

# Aeon’s End — Expedition Packet Schema (Selector Output)

This describes the JSON returned by `select_expedition()` in `aeons_end_expedition_selector_v3.py`.

The selector outputs *verbatim YAML fields* for the selected entities so the narrator can read them directly.
The selector performs **selection only** (no win/lose state, rematches, reinforcements, or reward timing).

Guarantee (given your datasets): the selector returns **collision-free** selections:
- No repeated nemesis across the planned battle sequence.
- No repeated friend or foe across the planned battle sequence.
- No name overlap between mages and any selected friend/foe/nemesis.

If constraints cannot be satisfied, the selector fails with an error (indicating a dataset/scope issue).

---

## Top-level shape

```json
{
  "meta": { ... },
  "setting": { ... },
  "protect_target": "Gravehold" | "Xaxos" | null,
  "mages": [ ... ],
  "final_nemesis": { ... },
  "battle_plan": [ ... ],
  "availability": { ... }
}
```

---

## meta

```json
{
  "generated_at_utc": "ISO-8601 string",
  "seed": 12345,
  "attempt": 1,
  "attempt_seed": 987654321,
  "inputs": {
    "mage_count": 4,
    "length": "short|standard|long",
    "content_waves": ["..."],
    "content_boxes": ["..."]
  }
}
```

`attempt_seed` is the deterministic sub-seed used for the successful collision-free draw.

---

## setting

Selected by wave name from `wave_settings.yaml` (`wave_settings: { "<Wave>": {...} }`).

Returned as:

```json
{
  "wave_name": "2nd Wave",
  "...": "verbatim setting fields"
}
```

Narrator note:
- Use setting fields as **conceptual inspiration**, do not copy phrases verbatim.

---

## protect_target

- `null` unless `setting.wave_name` is `5th Wave` (Outcasts rule).
- If set, the narrator includes `Protect:` in the Handoff and treats Xaxos as an in-world presence if chosen.

---

## mages

Each mage is a full mage entry plus `chosen_variant` (verbatim variant dict).

The narrator uses:
- Display name: `name`
- Handoff box: `chosen_variant.box`

---

## final_nemesis

Full verbatim nemesis mapping. Tier is stored as `battle: 1..4`.

---

## battle_plan

Battle order list. Each element includes:
- `battle_index` (1-based)
- `tier` (int; expedition structure tier)
- `nemesis` (verbatim mapping)
- `friend` (verbatim mapping or null)
- `foe` (verbatim mapping or null)

---

## availability

```json
{
  "friends_available": true,
  "foes_available": true,
  "include_friend_foe_pair": true
}
```

---

Commit message:

Centralize narration rules in operational instructions

Aeons_End_Expedition_Packet_Schema.md, after:

# Aeon’s End — Expedition Packet Schema (Selector Output)

This describes the JSON returned by `select_expedition()` in `aeons_end_expedition_selector_v3.py`.
Authoritative selection guarantees, workflow rules, and narration requirements are defined in
`Aeons_End_Operational_Instructions_With_Selector_v3_1.md`.

---

## Top-level shape

```json
{
  "meta": { ... },
  "setting": { ... },
  "protect_target": "Gravehold" | "Xaxos" | null,
  "mages": [ ... ],
  "final_nemesis": { ... },
  "battle_plan": [ ... ],
  "availability": { ... }
}
```

---

## meta

```json
{
  "generated_at_utc": "ISO-8601 string",
  "seed": 12345,
  "attempt": 1,
  "attempt_seed": 987654321,
  "inputs": {
    "mage_count": 4,
    "length": "short|standard|long",
    "content_waves": ["..."],
    "content_boxes": ["..."]
  }
}
```

`attempt_seed` is the deterministic sub-seed used for the successful collision-free draw.

---

## setting

Selected by wave name from `wave_settings.yaml` (`wave_settings: { "<Wave>": {...} }`).

Returned as:

```json
{
  "wave_name": "2nd Wave",
  "...": "verbatim setting fields"
}
```

Narrator note:
- Use setting fields as **conceptual inspiration**, do not copy phrases verbatim.

---

## protect_target

- `null` unless `setting.wave_name` is `5th Wave` (Outcasts rule).
- If set, the narrator includes `Protect:` in the Handoff and treats Xaxos as an in-world presence if chosen.

---

## mages

Each mage is a full mage entry plus `chosen_variant` (verbatim variant dict).

The narrator uses:
- Display name: `name`
- Handoff box: `chosen_variant.box`

---

## final_nemesis

Full verbatim nemesis mapping. Tier is stored as `battle: 1..4`.

---

## battle_plan

Battle order list. Each element includes:
- `battle_index` (1-based)
- `tier` (int; expedition structure tier)
- `nemesis` (verbatim mapping)
- `friend` (verbatim mapping or null)
- `foe` (verbatim mapping or null)

---

## availability

```json
{
  "friends_available": true,
  "foes_available": true,
  "include_friend_foe_pair": true
}
```

---
